+++
title = "Creusot 0.10.0: February update"
date = 2026-02-24
author = "The Creusot Team"
description = "Assumptions, workspaces, and nightly shenanigans"
+++

## What's new in Creusot?

This February's release brings a couple of QOL improvements.

### Assume (trusted asserts)

The `proof_assert!` macro now supports the `#[trusted]` attribute.

```rust
#[trusted]
proof_assert! { answer == 42 };
```

It removes the proof obligation that would come from the assertion,
so it effectively becomes an *assumption* available to
the rest of the program after it.

We could have called it `assume!` or `proof_assume!`,
but reusing `#[trusted]` makes it convenient to grep for all
assumptions in a project.

This is useful as a placeholder à la `todo!()`, letting you
stub out parts of a proof while you're focusing on other aspects
of it.

### Wildcard patterns on integers

In `match` expressions with integer patterns,
the wildcard branch now remembers the values that
the integer does **not** equal.

```rust
match n {
    42 => proof_assert! { n == 42 },
    _ => proof_assert! { n != 42 }, // FIXED
}
```

Thanks to Eric Jackson for [the contribution](https://github.com/creusot-rs/creusot/pull/1899)!

### Multi-package workspaces

We added options to select packages in workspaces.

The command line option `-p` (or `--package`) selects a package to build
with `cargo creusot` and to run provers on with `cargo creusot prove`.
This is basically the same option as in `cargo build`, but to call `why3find`
and run provers, we must additionally find the output Coma files corresponding
to these packages. 

As the Creusot compiler is basically a modified `rustc`, the unit of compilation is a crate.
A package defines multiple crates, and `cargo` does not build all of them by default:
only libraries and binaries, excluding tests, examples, and benches.
Creusot only supports that default target selection for now (that is libraries and binaries),
until the need for others arises.

You can also choose a default set of packages to build with `cargo creusot`,
using the `default-member` field in the `[workspace.metadata.creusot]`
section of your workspace `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[workspace.metadata.creusot]
default-members = ["PKG1", "PKG2"]
```

This falls back to the existing `default-member` field in `[workspace]`
for regular `cargo build`. Having a separate field for Creusot lets you
designate packages specifically as targets for formal verification,
next to other buildable but unverified packages.

### Story of a toolchain update

Creusot depends on a nightly Rust toolchain. With this release,
we upgraded our toolchain from nightly-2025-11-13 to nightly-2026-01-29.

We do toolchain upgrades regularly to keep up with the fast-moving
`rustc` API. Ideally we do this at the beginning of each release cycle
to give time to potentially subtle issues to surface by the next release.

This time, there was one change that required a bit of thinking to deal with:
the orphan check now panics when it encounters an unnameable type
(typically, a function type).

#### The orphan check and unnameable types

The orphan check is what enforces "trait coherence" in Rust: that there is at most
one implementation of a trait for any given type. The orphan check basically answers
the question "might another crate implement this trait `Tr` for this type `Ty`?"

In `rustc`, this check is performed whenever you implement a trait.
Since you must spell out the type for the `impl` block,
there is normally no way to encounter an unnameable type there 
(unnameable types are types of functions, closures, and coroutines).
However `rustc` did have an experimental feature "`typeof`" which could
cause the orphan check to encounter unnameable types, allegedly
(I'm not familiar with the details).
[That feature was removed](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/148256)
in late November, and the now unreachable code in the orphan check
that dealt with unnameable types was replaced with panics.

In Creusot, we use the orphan check in the implementation of *type invariants*.
This feature lets you specify a property that should be satisfied by all values of a type.
For example, you can define a type of integers bounded by 42 as a `struct` with
an `Invariant` impl:

```rust
struct Bounded42(usize);

impl Invariant for Bounded42 {
    #[logic]
    fn invariant(self) -> bool {
        pearlite! { self.0 <= 42usize } 
    }
}
```

All functions that take a `Bounded42` argument can assume the type invariant,
and all functions that return a `Bounded42` must prove the type invariant.

Any type `Ty` has a type invariant, which we determine as follows:

- if there is an instance `Ty: Invariant`, that is a *user-provided* type invariant;
- if there is definitely no such instance, then we fall back to a *structural* type invariant
    derived from the type definition (it basically says that all fields satisfy
    their type invariant);
- if there is no instance `Ty: Invariant` in this context,
    but we cannot rule it out definitely
    (an instance may appear after instantiating some type variables,
    possibly using implementations provided by an unknown crate),
    then the type invariant is an undefined predicate.

The orphan check is what distinguishes between the last two cases.
Furthermore, because type invariants apply to all types, this also concerns
unnameable types: for example if you pass a closure as an argument to a function,
then Creusot will look for its type invariant, involving an orphan check.

The update to the orphan check caused it to panic in this case.

The fix is simple in hindsight: we replace unnameable types (function types)
with the unit type `()` before invoking the orphan check.
Indeed, these types should behave the same as far as the orphan check
is concerned: both the unit type and function types from the current crate
or its dependencies are "external types" from the point of view of a
sibling or descendant crate.

It is also possible to fix the orphan check in `rustc` itself to not
panic in those cases even though they don't happen within `rustc`.
But our workaround works and we just don't have an incentive to tinker
with it further, at least until that becomes a bigger issue.
